Hi Tellus.
>> Hi Miriam.
>> So, we've had episodes about
international stocks on the show and
we've had episodes about US bonds.
>> Yeah. Where you going with this?
>> In light of current events,
um we feel that it's time this week to
talk about something very exciting,
which is international bonds.
>> Oh, connecting the dots.
>> Yes, this has been the missing link in
everyone's portfolio, which we're about
to find out. But first, we want to check
in on the price of oil and what else the
market might be thinking about this
upcoming week.
>> I just want to remind everybody of what
we talked about on a previous episode
with Natasha Kanerva from JP Morgan
about how to think about the price of
oil because I think that really like
it's just a good framework, I think. So,
what she said was was that every million
barrels of production that are missing
kind of translates into like $4 in the
price of oil, right? So, her math was
that if they're going to be 16 million
barrels of oil that are a day that are
not being produced, then that means
that, you know, 16 * 4 = $64, which
brought you from the original oil price
before all of this, which was in the $60
range, to the $120 range, you know,
where where things have topped out. Um
how so, the fact that we're at 90-ish
basically means that the market is
saying, "Well, we're not going to lose
all 16 barrels of production. We're
going to lose some of that." That is, I
think, the framework for thinking about
what the price of oil is telling us
about kind of the state of the conflict.
>> And people's expectations for the
duration of the conflict, but also how
certain nations might be able to
independently negotiate with Iran to
have oil pass through the strait as
Natasha talked about.
>> Or in the sort of strange moment of the
US kind of letting Iran sell some oil,
uh partly in order to help kind of calm
the oil market. Uh but I think that also
the the framing of of, you know, how we
talk about the price of oil and why it
matters might start to change as we get
into earnings season. And already we're
going to get a little bit of a preview
of that from a handful of companies that
are reporting for whom not just oil,
obviously, but other commodity products
and things that are related to oil and
other stuff that's trapped, you know,
fertilizer, you know, other things that
aren't passing through the Strait of
Hormuz that that might normally, natural
gas, etc.
And those are going to be like food
companies.
>> Right.
>> The consumer staples, companies that
make food in
>> US. Miriam, who's reporting this up
coming week?
>> have Conagra, Cal-Maine, and McCormick,
the spice and condiments company. And
those those companies will be
interesting to watch, I think, because
they've already experienced so much
inflation in terms of, you know,
their key inputs.
And up into a certain point they were
able to pass that along to customers in
the form of price increases. But last
year that runway sort of ran out for
them.
>> And consumers can only take so much.
>> Yeah, consumers started to say, "You
know what? I'm not going to buy your
product at this price."
And that was a very bad sign for them
because despite the fact that these are
staples, the you know, consumers pushing
back on that showed that they don't have
ultimate pricing power. And that means
they have to eat the cost in terms of
their own margins. And their stocks have
been hurting as a result of that.
McCormick's trying to do a deal with
Unilever
kind of because of this situation, like
we need to do something to solve our
>> Just add more
>> competitive position.
>> diversify the types of, you know, food
products it's selling in.
>> Right. So this just, you know, this, you
know, current conflict is just adding
more pressure to those companies, it
seems to me. Like this is yet another
reason that inflation could continue and
could continue to eat into their
profits.
>> And and they're they're going to be
reporting quarters that that that go
through February. So we won't get quite
into the results that they have after
the start of the conflict. So I think
people will really be looking for those
outlooks and other commentary around
kind of what the what they're now
seeing.
>> We also wanted to turn to our listener
feedback. Um on our past episode, we
asked gold versus oil, which one are you
turning to
um as a hedge against inflation? And we
got a few interesting responses. Um the
first one that we have here is from
Rajesh Patwa.
>> He actually sent us a voicemail. So,
let's listen to it.
>> Gold is a stronger hedge for broad
inflation.
While crude is a tactical hedge only
during supply shock-driven situations.
Gold is winning on stability,
central bank demand, and long-term
purchasing power protection.
Crude oil is highly volatile and tied to
geopolitical disruptions. Thank you.
>> So, that's interesting. He sees gold as
being the more enduring thing. Oil is
sort of a moment in time type of trade
for him.
>> And of course, you know, another thing
that people turn, you know,
traditionally look at are uh bonds uh as
a hedge. Uh we've had other listeners
give us that feedback. And you know, US
Treasury bonds have not been
uh knocking the lights out lately,
either. They have not been been playing
the safe haven role that you might
expect them to.
>> No. And when I look at my own portfolio,
um I see red in both the stock and bond
categories, which means, you know, these
bonds that I put into my portfolio to
diversify, to protect against a downturn
in the stock market, are not doing their
jobs. Normally, the point of a classic
60/40 portfolio, 60 stocks, 40 bonds, it
is that when the stocks go down, the
bonds are supposed to go up to protect
you against, you know, the decline on
the other side. It's supposed to be a
defensive move. They're And they're
supposed to be uncorrelated, but that
hasn't been the case recently.
>> Well, and the the the correlation of
those two things, seeing a country's
stocks and bonds both fall at the same
time as we've seen at times here in the
US recently. That was a hallmark of not
like a major developed economy like the
US, but an emerging market economy. Your
uh Brazil's or Mexico's, uh you know,
those types of countries where you'd
see, "Oh, okay, things aren't going
well. The bonds and the stocks both sell
off at the same time." But,
that isn't necessarily the case all the
time for those countries these days. And
as a matter of fact, it's become more of
a pattern in the US, in Europe, places
where there are big concerns about the
the fiscal, you know, how much are those
countries spending? Uh is is inflation a
problem in those developed market
countries?
>> And it is, right? And we've have a
combination of
inflation and we have um you know, the
deficits that each of these countries
are taking on. So, I mean, this
conversation that we have coming up was
truly a revelation to me. It It just
really shows you that like, it's not
that bonds aren't working, it's that the
bonds I own or the bonds that many of us
own aren't the right bonds.
>> Like you said, that's why we had a
really interesting conversation earlier
this week with somebody who knows a lot
about global bonds, especially those of
emerging market countries. And that's
Eric Fine. He is a portfolio manager at
VanEck. He's the head of active emerging
market debt, and the funds he oversees
have bonds including like a bunch of
ETFs, have bonds from countries like
Brazil, China, Mexico, South Africa,
Malaysia, Colombia, India, Peru, you
know, not necessarily what people think
of when they think, "Oh, I should add
some bonds to my portfolio."
>> He had a lot of interesting things to
say about the relationship between oil,
which a lot of these countries produce,
and the bonds from those countries. I
think that'll be a really interesting
thing for everyone to hear about.
>> And we're going to have that
conversation after the break.
>> [music]
>> Welcome back. Eric, welcome to the show.
>> Thanks. Thanks, Tellus.
>> So,
our listeners have talked about this in
some of the feedback to us. And you see
it in fund flows. There's been a
tremendous uptake of bonds, especially
global bond funds, not just treasuries.
So, it does seem like right now people
are diversifying into owning more bonds.
But,
very recently, you know, since the
conflict in Iran has started, we haven't
seen necessarily the
inverse relationship between stocks and
bonds that you might want. So, it
doesn't feel like bonds are a safe
haven, but a lot of people still have
been treating bond funds like a safe
haven. So, Eric, what is going on right
now? Why doesn't it feel like bonds feel
very safe?
>> Bonds, the way most of your viewers
think of them, have been bad. Last 5
years are down like
two, two and a half, three on the
aggregate treasury.
>> these? They're not acting as a
diversifier.
>> Our benchmark in that bad context, just
our benchmark, up almost 2% a year in
the last 5 years.
>> benchmark, you mean the emerging markets
benchmark?
>> EM government bonds. So, we run a blend
fund that invests in dollar denominated
and local and the typical benchmark is
half local currency bonds, half EM
dollar denominated bonds.
>> So, it just means that we, the typical
US investors, are not owning the right
bonds to provide that level of
diversification right now.
>> Exposed, there's no argument that says
that's not correct. Um, in general, our
funds like ours will have higher carry.
>> Mhm.
>> Normal carry is around 7%. Um,
>> What does carry mean in this context?
>> Carry is the all the So, everyone, you
know, yield can get really confusing cuz
you have an SEC yield, you have
uh your yield to maturity. The simplest
version, I think all all of your
listeners should think of is the coupons
divided by the prices. If nothing
happens in the next year, what are you
going to get? But, what's going on in
the world is really bullish for
commodities prices, like it or not. And
my benchmark generally exports
commodities. And if you're active you
can avoid you can do more you can have a
greater exposure to the commodities
exporters and avoid those that are
vulnerable. There are a number of EMs
that are obviously vulnerable in this
environment.
>> Can you give an example of some
commodity exporting
um you know members of your uh index
that you know that might be the types of
bonds you might be owning today or might
want to own today?
>> Yeah so there's a big range and that's a
a great thing about emerging markets is
you can get extremely diversified. We've
got a robust very ancient well decades
old benchmark.
Um so when you see where we're allocated
they will all make sense and they will
be they will
uh make sense relative to the benchmark.
Um
dollar denominated bonds the one I'd
mentioned especially because of its
idiosyncrasies Venezuela. Even
year-to-date I think it's
>> Venezuela bonds
>> Venezuela bonds in dollars
>> How have they done this year up about
given what has happened in Venezuela?
>> Year-to-date they're still up about 13%
in dollar terms the one I picked I think
it was around a 10-year um
uh
maybe a 6-year bond um
>> Was was Maduro's arrest good for those
bonds?
>> No question.
>> Okay.
>> These bonds were because
number one they created a scenario of a
transition in politics which was a zero
odds scenario the the Friday before.
Number two the way it was implemented
there was complete escalation dominance
and it was a successful transition
without a lot of risk. Delcy Rodriguez
hardly a risk.
>> That's that's that's a new leader.
>> president right? Um there have been
further moves last week to um replace
senior officials in the security and
particular defense uh apparatus. So
that's kind of working um and
I'll put it this way. When sometimes I
get presented as somewhat of a Venezuela
expert I was doing calls. Number one
call question I got was what does this
mean for Taiwan?
I didn't understand the question.
>> Hm.
>> What does it mean for Thailand? What
does it mean for Colombia, which is
actually not 10,000 mi away? It was the
best performing local currency market.
Why? US presence is a stabilizing factor
for most of these countries. The process
how we got there in US political terms
not my not what I'm getting into. But
for that neighborhood, it is a
stabilizing factor.
Brazil is a big one. 15% yields arguably
4% inflation, big commodities exporters.
They're up to their necks in dollars.
Most these countries are up to their
necks in dollars. Brazil has a fiscal
problem, but also an election.
And and I wouldn't be surprised I don't
think the market should even
dismiss the idea that that
a Lula term is adverse for Brazil. I've
been through I've lived through Lula
good Lula and bad Lula. I've lived
through good Erdogan and bad Erdogan.
It's not a straightforward
>> So the the headlines you might read in
the you know, foreign coverage of the
newspaper, you know,
about about a leader sort of what what
feels like a crisis going on in that
country. And I think US investors are
used to thinking of of emerging market
countries as sort of going through just
cycles of crises, right? Everyone, you
know, even people who didn't live
through them can probably name, you
know, the peso crisis, the ruble crisis,
right? Are you saying that that that's
kind of not really the right framework
anymore?
>> Yes, a great way to put it. Tell us I'm
not only saying it's not not the right
framework, it's the right framework for
the developed markets which are
generating the crises. And what happens
when we have our crisis, right? Often
with the opposite. You could look at
especially US policy makers as
focusing on the portfolio balance
channel. Something goes wrong, you got
to get stocks up. I get it, but there
are limit there are social limits to
that.
>> Fed put, right? You know, the Fed will
come to the rescue, lower rates, assets
get inflated again. You're saying that's
that's that's the playbook that some
emerging markets have have moved away
from. Where where now we've sort of
embraced that model that we were so
critical of.
>> No one's alive. No one's experienced the
pain of that, but I I really challenge
people to find
political parties across the spectrum in
in Mexico or or even Indonesia that
explicitly endorse harnessing a central
bank to achieve economic objectives. You
have to have been blind
to what happened. That kills the poor.
That kills banks. That creates
inflation. That creates worse than
inflation.
It strains society and they've
>> all been through that. Again, you know,
you would ask what countries are
winners. Malaysia's exports oil and
chips.
>> Huh.
>> Right? And you know, they're
an incredibly well-run place and it's a
future reserve currency. That's the real
story is when I say CNY's been stable
and is up this much versus treasuries,
it's an interesting headline.
Um
they are their goal is to make it a
reserve currency and there's no way me
trading my currencies can ignore that
and say that I'm supposed to only focus
on risk being hurt by general news that
is really more about the VIX or stocks.
I don't want to downplay what's going on
in Iran, but there are clear winners
when energy prices are and copper prices
are higher.
>> What about US Treasuries? Should
investors right now be selling US
Treasuries and buying some of these
emerging market bonds or is it not one
or the other?
>> I guess I would say the following.
First, um
over the last 20 years you were supposed
to have had a lot more EM bonds in your
bond portfolio than
than anyone does and you're supposed to
have fewer DM bonds.
>> Developed markets.
>> Developed market bonds, right? So, your
own treasuries. Um so,
uh when we present we've been using the
lens of fiscal dominance to describe the
world, namely avoid places with
excessive government debt. That is the
developed markets.
And favor countries with low levels of
government debt. That is mostly emerging
markets. Um
uh
you may take that to say, "Hey, you know
what?
I'd
If If an investor hears that and says,
"You know what? I'm just going to be
more cautious on DM bonds." I'm happy.
>> Mhm.
>> I'm happy. It's this extreme comfort
level that's just that concerns me, not
so much that there are better things to
do in bonds. Obviously, there are better
things to do in bonds, and it's hard to
find portfolio managers that would
accept a portfolio with you know, really
limited bonds, but I get the idea.
>> I'm an American, you know, my advisor
will say, "Look, the US has exorbitant
privilege. Right. Maybe treasuries are,
you know, not going to perform quite
like this, but you know,
>> going to lose your shirt.
>> the dollar remains the global reserve
currency. That has a benefit for
treasuries. There are people who feel
like this the the kind of, you know, the
IMF Washington Consensus model maybe
won't be good for the long-term
stability of some of those countries.
You know, how much should I buy into
this idea that that the treasury is now,
>> you know,
the treasury is the emerging market what
you might think of, and you know, these
other ones are are not. Um, how how how
far down that road should should I
really go in my thinking?
>> I really often get upset when folks will
come back to us and say, "Oh, you
predicted this because you didn't own
it." No, that was We're not predicting
If we we would never run a fund based on
predicting these sorts of things. You
weren't getting paid anything. You had
guaranteed negative yields in some of
these countries.
>> So, the risk-return profile was not
>> You can find something else of equal
risk arguably or lower risk. It's so the
opportunity cost is almost zero. So,
that was
>> because something is safe doesn't mean
you're getting paid enough to own. You
are losing money by
essentially leaving your money in in the
financial equivalent of a of a mattress
with without springs or whatever,
[laughter] you know.
>> Nothing happens to our bonds, we're
going to get around 7%.
>> Mhm.
>> Nothing happens to those, you're going
to get three to four.
>> Mhm.
>> And it looks like observably things are
happening to those that are different
>> the R, you mean EM, and those you mean
DM.
>> EM, I think of my country as the
emerging market countries, and DM is the
stuff that most people have their
exposure to.
>> not really taking any any additional
volatility risk, or or the risk that
that that something goes wrong in a in a
part of the world you're not paying
attention to. That That extra,
you know, carry that you talked about is
not costing you anything, those extra
few points.
>> That's the question. Um
uh EM effects fall is lower than
developed market fall now. And EM
>> Those currencies are moving, you know,
more predictably than than with lower
volatility.
>> If you think what have been the stories
for the last few years? Sterling has
been the worry. British pound, right?
Yen has been the What And what
characterizes them? Really dysfunctional
or really not dysfunctional is too
strong a word, but really problematic
and market-concerning fiscal stances
that has infected their bond markets.
When you see a country and their rates
interest rates are going higher and the
FX is going higher, that's nowhere to
hide.
>> We're going to take a quick break, and
when we come back, we've got a couple
more questions for Eric Fine of VanEck.
Uh crazy moves in oil, war in the Middle
East, surely that isn't good for global
bonds, right? All right, we're going to
talk about that after the break.
Okay, Eric, so, you know, we have this
big conflict going on in the Middle East
right now, and there are all these
countries that are being directly
affected by the war.
So, Kuwait, the UAE, Bahrain, Saudi
Arabia, should you own those bonds? Or
seems like this would be a very bad time
to own.
>> I would think you would need to invoke a
very
fast and
um
seemingly unlikely scenario in Iran. I
think that would probably require actual
regime change, not what the market is
thinking about right now, which is a
murky longer-term situation. Um and uh
the biggest observation is how well
Gulf bonds hung in there. By Gulf bonds,
I'm meaning the rich ones that are all
that are net creditors or have
incredible amounts of of reserves and
and and liquidity.
>> What what countries do
>> Yeah, so Qatar, Kuwait, Saudi, and
Bahrain you should put in there. Um
but the other bonds which are mostly
held by Asians and they view them as
treasuries. Another example, maybe maybe
if you're looking at it as treasuries,
you should get paid, you know, for the
kind of risk that you see there. But
they look at them as treasuries. These
are all sub 100 over treasury.
Uh
>> Meaning the the yield pick up the yield
pick up the yield pick
>> over treasury. So, these are priced
really
for the credits that they are, but maybe
not the scenario that's existing.
>> And is that just because people think
this conflict is going to drag on for
much longer now?
>> I think two ways to look at this if you
really want to be simple. One is
uh let's put
Which countries are likely to be more
permanently affected by this regardless
of these outcomes in terms of time or
outcome?
>> That's what we keep talking about. What
are the what are the lasting effect even
if the even if peace breaks out, you
know, in the near future? Yeah.
>> And my general point is high commodity
prices is
a permanent feature. Now, you would
think that and that helps most of my
countries, but if you're directly
affected and there are observable risks
and you're sub 100 over,
you're going to have to depend on a fast
um really regime change scenario in in
in Iran for those to to be good risk
reward, um but they are good credits and
you know, in that scenario they could do
okay, but I think the main point is the
winners are generally in EM. Some of
them are adversaries. I won't mention
that, but it's kind of obvious if we're
not sanctioning
Russian oil and and and even Iranian oil
and uh China can buy it. Um uh but um
winners are commodities exporters, which
is who? It's all of Latin America.
Basically, every country in Latin
America.
>> exporter in the Middle East, then you
have a little asterisk by your name
right now.
>> Correct. Then, it depends.
>> So, anecdotally, a lot of people are
looking at getting into trading oil,
thinking about oil as a hedge now that,
you know, the price might be higher for
a while.
It sounds like there's an opportunity
here for you to to look at at emerging
markets and in particular some of these
emerging market bonds as another way to
sort of
express the view in your portfolio that,
yeah, commodity prices are going to be
higher Mhm. For a long time.
>> Do you think that makes sense?
>> I think that totally makes sense. And I
guess the way, um, the way I would look
at it is, I'm sold with inflation, the
more conventional argument that, look,
you're already paying me a higher real
rate relative to your fundamentals. So,
in other words, if if I could if I could
line up all the countries that happen to
be called developed markets, the good to
bad, and how much they pay, it's going
to be a straight line. Higher rate, you
already don't pay me more. Whereas, at
least in EM, you get paid for the risk.
And they do have high real rates. They
do have lower inflation that anchors
them. So, I would say that's enough of
an argument, and that's the core
orthodox argument you make. However, if
you have a major positive terms of trade
shock, that's one of these things that
developed market economists aren't super
comfortable looking at because
in EM, they can be very dramatic. Um, if
you if, you know, if you export 10% of
GDP and that export price goes up 50%,
that's going to have a major impact. And
so, I would say that you're going to get
your what you need conventionally,
which has already happened, which is
you're getting paid a higher carry or
yield relative to the risk, however
defined. Is it upside risk to your US
bond portfolio? Probably not.
>> Mhm.
>> Probably not. Um, Um, probably
inflationary or stagflationary.
Um, and if commodity prices are high,
rising, and if that and beginning to
affect expectations, you're going to see
more behavior of what you've seen in the
Treasury market, which is, "Wow,
inflation is higher."
>> Mhm.
>> And rate hikes aren't going to stop or
going to open the Hormuz Strait. And you
look at a
a country like China where inflation
remains anchored despite these
challenges and inflation and inflation
expectations
part of that is
because their balance sheet, because
they have they're buying at a lower
price of for oil than the price we see
on our screen. So, do you want to invest
Do you want to own yields in a country
that's paying lower prices for oil or
you I mean, it's you know, or
or be exposed to a country that's paying
higher prices in oil.
You know, the terms of trade fact is a
big deal. There is not one price for
oil, right? There are many prices and
we're paying the higher one. That would
be another way of looking at it.
>> So, Eric, a lot of people are really
worried about what's happening, you
know, at the
with with gas gas prices and gasoline
and what impact that's going to have on
inflation.
Uh, is this something people can can can
do
to to protect their portfolios?
>> I think it's not a bad way to look at
things. If your listeners are probably
concerned about how they're going to buy
food and energy, right? It's the biggest
part of your consumption basket. Um, my
countries export it.
Right? So,
that should help their currencies and if
they're running things right
and they're and inflation's under
control, it should also
help their interest rates. If they go
down, that's good if you if you're
exposed. Asia has proved this by
anchoring inflation for many years now
and now has rates similar to the US. Um,
but yeah, Colombia 15% rates, they
export oil.
That's not unreasonable to think about
the connection between that.
>> And just just just remind us like what
would be the downside scenario for these
bonds? Like what what would be happening
in the world where you where you
you know, say that well, boy that that
the EM debt part of my of my portfolio
has been a drag. What would be happening
in the world for that to be the case?
>> US, Europe, UK, Japan wake up, get their
acts together, cut debt and deficits,
restructure their economies,
and have no political or social risk due
to financialization and income
inequality.
>> I think we could safely say that's not
about to happen. [laughter]
But this has been like this has been so
eye-opening because it makes me think,
you know, oh, I really need to go back
and refigure my own portfolio, you know,
my I'm just like all of our listeners
and bonds have not been working for me
and now this explains why
and it explains, you know, a lot of what
we can be doing. I think it seems like
in maybe a less risky way than becoming
amateur oil traders.
>> Eric, this has been a great
conversation. Thank you.
>> Thanks to all of us. Thanks, Marie.
>> [music]
>> I got my husband an Oscar, a fake Oscar
in Hollywood that said husband of the
year and he has it on the shelf.
>> [laughter]
>> I like that.
I only I only got the the the foreign
press award for husband of the
>> [laughter]
[music]